# Patterns/method

## Prefix sum

The prefix sum method involves iterating over an array to create a new list of prefix sums for each element. For instance, given the array [1, 2, 3], we generate the prefixSumArray [0, 1, 3, 6]. This allows us to query the sums of a sequence of elements in constant time. For example, prefixSumArray[3] - prefixSumArray[0] yields 6.

To calculate the sum between the 1st and 3rd elements (1-based index from the original array), we use the formula prefixSum[j] - prefixSum[i-1]. Applying this, prefixSum[3] - prefixSum[0] gives us 6.

## Heap

What is a Heap? - A binary tree based data structure with particular characteristics.
Heap is a complete binary tree. Complete at all levels, except possibly for last level. Filled from left to right.
There are two Heap types:
- Min Heap with minimal element at the root
- Max Heap with maximum element at the root

Priority Queue can be implemented using Heap. Sometimes people call Heap - Priority Queue. But Priority Queue can be implemented using other data structures (like binary search tree), but heaps are preferred due to efficiency.
Whether it's a Min Heap or Max Heap the very top element has highest or lowest priority. For min heap every child has to be greater or equal of the parent. For max heap every child of the parent node has to be less or equal of the parent. On different branches of the heap nodes still can be greater or less each other, but what defines the min/max heap is relation between direct parent and its children. So heaps maintain weak ordering, they are ordered but not perfectly ordered. There is still a rule at every point.

Heap is always complete and balanced and we add nodes from left to right per each level.

The min/max value is always at the top and accessible in O(1) constant time. Which is very efficient.
When we add the node to the heap. We add it to the end and we need to heapify up.
When we remove the node from the heap, we move the last node to the place of removed node and heapify down.
We can update the node, and upon update we will need to heapify the heap. Depending on whether the updaated value is decreasing or increasing from prev value we will need to decide to heapify up or heapify down.

Heap can be represented as array, because we can assign indexes to nodes, and then list those nodes as respective array items. To be able to access children or parent of particular node at index i. We can apply equation: 2i + 1 to get the left child, and 2i+2 to get the right child. And with parent we can apply equation |(i - 1)/2|

## Greedy algorithms

Greedy algorithm are focusing on:

- local optima
- usually efficient and correct when local optima can generate global optima (maxima)
- can be efficient

Cons:
- can be suboptimal
- no backtracking (once the decision is made we do not change it)
